---
title: Optimizer/Planner in PostgreSQL
---

## General Idea

* The plan tree generated by parser is fed into a planner which uses a genetic algorithm (GEQO) or a dynamic programming algorithm (standard planner) to search possible execution paths. These paths are evaluated using a histogram-based cost estimator and the one with the lowest estimated cost will be actually executed.

## Planner/Optimizer

### Basic Data Sctructure: `RelOptInfo`

* For each *base relation* involved in the query, planner/optimizer will build a `RelOptInfo` structure. A *base relation* is either a remitive table (scan this relation) or a temporary view of subquery output.

* `RelOptInfo` is also built for join relations. A *join relation* is a set of base relations, and the word *set* is used intentially as the order of *base relation*s in a *join relation* doesn't matter. E.g., for tables *A, B, and C*, the join relation of them is always *{A, B, C}* no matter which two tables are joined first.

* `RelOptInfo` contains *paths* that specifies the order and operator to scan or join tables. Those paths are stored in `RelOptInfo.pathlist`.

* Final execution plan is the path with the lowest estimated cost of the `RelOptInfo` containing all the *base relation*s for the corresponding query.

### Join Tree Construction

1. Construct `RelOptInfo` for *base relation*s first. `RelOptInfo.pathlist` for a *base relation* is essentially a set of applicable scan methods. It also contains all join clauses that involve this relation in `RelOptInfo.joininfo`.
2. Flattenning. Normally, join clauses are "flattened" so that only a list of `RelOptInfo` exists. But this "flatten" process may not be valid as `FULL OUTER JOIN` can not be flattened. This is stoped by `join_collapse_limit` or `from_collapse_limit`. After flatterning, a list of relations that can be joined in any order is formed where a individual relation can be a list of relations joined by un-flatten-able clause.
3. The pseudo-flattened list of relations is then processed recursively from bottom to up.
4. Construct join tree.
   * Standard planner (Dynamic Programming algorithm): assuming `n` tables to be joined, it starts with searching all possible pairs of joinable primitive `RelOptInfo`, then all possible combination of 3 `RelOptInfo`s and so on.

      As this approach finishes constructing all paths for a `RelOptInfo` before construcing paths for its parents, memory management is much easier. Only the *"cheapest"* path for each `RelOptInfo` is stored.

      Essentially, this is a bottom-up dynamic programming with memorization approach.

   * GEQO(Genetic Algorithm) TODO

## Cost Estimator

* PostgreSQL uses a histogram-based cost estimator.
* Histogram is a result of `Analyze;` command. It is store in a system catalog (`pg_stats`), which contains
  information gathered.
  * Metadata:
    * `null_frac`: Fraction of column entries that are null
    * `avg_width`: Average width in bytes of column's entries
    * `n_distinct`: if greater than zero, no. of distinct elements in the column. If smaller
          than zero, its absolute value is the fraction of distinct values over all values.
    * `most_common_vals`: most common values in the column
    * `most_common_freqs`: corresponding frequency of `most_common_vals`
    * `histogram_bounds`: A list of values that divide the column's values
          into groups of approximately equal population. Values in `most_common_vals` are omitted
          from this histogram calculation.
    * `Correlation`: correlation between column values and their row ordering.
    * `most_common_elems`: A list of non-null element values most often appearing within values of the column. (Null
          for scalar types.)
    * `most_common_elem_freqs`: A list of the frequencies of the most common element values, i.e., the fraction of
          rows containing at least one instance of the given value. Two or three additional values follow the
          per-element frequencies; these are the minimum and maximum of the preceding per-element frequencies, and
          optionally the frequency of null elements. (Null when most_common_elems is.)
    * `elem_count_histogram`: A histogram of the counts of distinct non-null element values within the values of the
          column, followed by the average number of distinct non-null elements. (Null for scalar types.)
* Number of pages & number of tuples in a table is store in a system catalog `pg_class`.
* To estimate the selectivity of a predicate
  * If it's a range predicate (`A.xx < 10`), estimation with assumption on a uniform distribution among each histogram
      bucket.
  * If it's a point predicate (`A.xx = 10`), check `most_common_vals` first. If it's one of the most common values,
      easy-peasy. If not, assume all the other values are distributed uniformly.
* Details in <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/8.1/planner-stats-details.html>.
