---
title: Executor
---

## **Names in PostgreSQL**

* **Command Type**: `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`
* **Range Table**: a list of relations used in the query. Each `Range Table Entry(RTE)` may be a table or a view. Referenced by numbers(index).
* **Result Relation**: Index of the output relation in range table. `SELECT` queries don't have a result relation.
* **Target List**: List of expressions that define the result of the query.
  1. `SELECT`: those expressions between `SELECT` and `FROM` in a SQL statement.
  2. `DELETE`: no target list.
  3. `INSERT`: the new rows inserted. Those in `VALUES` clause or `SELECT` clause in `INSERT ... SELECT`.
  4. `UPDATE`: new rows to replace.
* **Qualification** expressions in `WHERE` clause.

## **Plan Trees & State Trees**

* Planner produces a tree of `Plan` nodes. During executor startup, several parallel trees of identical strucutre containing executor `PlanState` nodes are generated. Each state node contains a pointer to the planner node, and executor state data.  Hence the plan tree is completely readonly during execution, good for plan caching and reuse.  
* Each `Plan` node may also contain expression trees of `Expr` nodes. These expression trees represent its target list, predicate and so on. `PlanState` node does not copy `Expr` nodes from its corresponding `Plan` node directly.

## **Expression Trees & ExprState Nodes**

* Every seperately executable expression tree is represented by a `ExprState` node. A seperately executable expression may be a `Plan` node's qualification or targetlist.
* Commonly the size of a `ExprState` node is very small, so instead of a tree-like structrue, information to evaluate the expression is stored in a linear way to elimilate tree-traversal time, stack depth, recursive funcion call overhead and so on. It is also easier to be optimized by the compiler.

## **Control Flow**

1. CreateQueryDesc

2. ExecutorStart
   * CreateExecutorState
        creates per-query context
   * Switch to per-query context to run ExecInitNode
   * AfterTriggerBeginQuery
   * ExecInitNode --- recursively scans plan tree
     * ExecInitNode
       * recurse into subsidiary nodes
     * CreateExprContext
       * creates per-tuple context
     * ExecInitExpr

3. ExecutorRun

   * ExecProcNode --- recursively called in per-query context
     * ExecEvalExpr --- called in per-tuple context
     * ResetExprContext --- to free memory

4. ExecutorFinish
   * ExecPostprocessPlan --- run any unfinished ModifyTable nodes
   * AfterTriggerEndQuery

5. ExecutorEnd
   * ExecEndNode --- recursively releases resources
   * FreeExecutorState
      * frees per-query context and child contexts

6. FreeQueryDesc
